Karl Marx
Capital Volume One

Part I
Commodities and Money

SECTION 1

THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY:
USE-VALUE AND VALUE
(THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE)



The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production
prevails, presents itself as "an immense accumulation of commodities," [1]
its unit being a single commodity. Our investigation must therefore begin
with the analysis of a commodity.

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by
its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another. The nature of
such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from
fancy, makes no difference. [2] Neither are we here concerned to know how
the object satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence,
or indirectly as means of production.

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c., may be looked at from the two
points of view of quality and quantity. It is an assemblage of many
properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. To discover the
various uses of things is the work of history. [3] So also is the
establishment of socially-recognized standards of measure for the
quantities of these useful objects. The diversity of these measures has its
origin partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, partly
in convention.

The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. [4] But this utility is not a
thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it
has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity, such as iron,
corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a
use-value, something useful. This property of a commodity is independent of
the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities. When
treating of use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite
quantities, such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The
use-values of commodities furnish the material for a special study, that of
the commercial knowledge of commodities. [5] Use-values become a reality
only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all
wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth. In the form of
society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material
depositories of exchange-value.

Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative relation,
as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for
those of another sort, [6] a relation constantly changing with time and
place. Hence exchange-value appears to be something accidental and purely
relative, and consequently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that
is inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a
contradiction in terms. [7] Let us consider the matter a little more
closely.

A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y
silk, or z gold, &c. — in short, for other commodities in the most
different proportions. Instead of one exchange-value, the wheat has,
therefore, a great many. But since x blacking, y silk, or z gold &c., each
represents the exchange-value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk,
z gold, &c., must, as exchange-values, be replaceable by each other, or
equal to each other. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given
commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, generally, is
only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in
it, yet distinguishable from it.

Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The proportions in which
they are exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be, can always be
represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to
some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn = x cwt. iron. What does this
equation tell us? It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter
of corn and x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something
common to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in
itself is neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is
exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to this third.

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In order to
calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them
into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by
something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the
product of the base multiplied by the altitude. In the same way the
exchange-values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in terms
of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or
less quantity.

This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any
other natural property of commodities. Such properties claim our attention
only in so far as they affect the utility of those commodities, make them
use-values. But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act
characterised by a total abstraction from use-value. Then one use-value is
just as good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient
quantity. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as
another, if the values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in
things of equal value.... An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of
as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." [8] As
use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as
exchange-values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do
not contain an atom of use-value.

If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of commodities, they
have only one common property left, that of being products of labour. But
even the product of labour itself has undergone a change in our hands. If
we make abstraction from its use-value, we make abstraction at the same
time from the material elements and shapes that make the product a
use-value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any other
useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight.
Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the
joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive
labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products themselves, we put
out of sight both the useful character of the various kinds of labour
embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that labour; there is nothing
left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same
sort of labour, human labour in the abstract.

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists of
the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere congelation of homogeneous
human labour, of labour-power expended without regard to the mode of its
expenditure. All that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power
has been expended in their production, that human labour is embodied in
them. When looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them
all, they are — Values.

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange-value
manifests itself as something totally independent of their use-value. But
if we abstract from their use-value, there remains their Value as defined
above. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the
exchange-value of commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value.
The progress of our investigation will show that exchange-value is the only
form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed.
For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value
independently of this, its form.

A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human
labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it. How, then,
is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the quantity of
the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. The
quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration, and labour-time
in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours.
