Karl Marx
Capital Volume One

Part I
Commodities and Money

SECTION 1

THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY:
USE-VALUE AND VALUE
(THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE)



The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production
prevails, presents itself as "an immense accumulation of commodities," [1]
its unit being a single commodity. Our investigation must therefore begin
with the analysis of a commodity.

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by
its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another. The nature of
such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from
fancy, makes no difference. [2] Neither are we here concerned to know how
the object satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence,
or indirectly as means of production.

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c., may be looked at from the two
points of view of quality and quantity. It is an assemblage of many
properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. To discover the
various uses of things is the work of history. [3] So also is the
establishment of socially-recognized standards of measure for the
quantities of these useful objects. The diversity of these measures has its
origin partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, partly
in convention.

The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. [4] But this utility is not a
thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it
has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity, such as iron,
corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a
use-value, something useful. This property of a commodity is independent of
the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities. When
treating of use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite
quantities, such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The
use-values of commodities furnish the material for a special study, that of
the commercial knowledge of commodities. [5] Use-values become a reality
only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all
wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth. In the form of
society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material
depositories of exchange-value.

Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative relation,
as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for
those of another sort, [6] a relation constantly changing with time and
place. Hence exchange-value appears to be something accidental and purely
relative, and consequently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that
is inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a
contradiction in terms. [7] Let us consider the matter a little more
closely.

A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y
silk, or z gold, &c. — in short, for other commodities in the most
different proportions. Instead of one exchange-value, the wheat has,
therefore, a great many. But since x blacking, y silk, or z gold &c., each
represents the exchange-value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk,
z gold, &c., must, as exchange-values, be replaceable by each other, or
equal to each other. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given
commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, generally, is
only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in
it, yet distinguishable from it.

Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The proportions in which
they are exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be, can always be
represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to
some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn = x cwt. iron. What does this
equation tell us? It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter
of corn and x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something
common to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in
itself is neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is
exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to this third.

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In order to
calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them
into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by
something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the
product of the base multiplied by the altitude. In the same way the
exchange-values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in terms
of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or
less quantity.

This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any
other natural property of commodities. Such properties claim our attention
only in so far as they affect the utility of those commodities, make them
use-values. But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act
characterised by a total abstraction from use-value. Then one use-value is
just as good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient
quantity. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as
another, if the values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in
things of equal value.... An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of
as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." [8] As
use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as
exchange-values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do
not contain an atom of use-value.

If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of commodities, they
have only one common property left, that of being products of labour. But
even the product of labour itself has undergone a change in our hands. If
we make abstraction from its use-value, we make abstraction at the same
time from the material elements and shapes that make the product a
use-value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any other
useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight.
Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the
joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive
labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products themselves, we put
out of sight both the useful character of the various kinds of labour
embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that labour; there is nothing
left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same
sort of labour, human labour in the abstract.

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists of
the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere congelation of homogeneous
human labour, of labour-power expended without regard to the mode of its
expenditure. All that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power
has been expended in their production, that human labour is embodied in
them. When looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them
all, they are — Values.

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange-value
manifests itself as something totally independent of their use-value. But
if we abstract from their use-value, there remains their Value as defined
above. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the
exchange-value of commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value.
The progress of our investigation will show that exchange-value is the only
form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed.
For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value
independently of this, its form.

A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human
labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it. How, then,
is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the quantity of
the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. The
quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration, and labour-time
in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours.

Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by
the quantity of labour spent on it, the more idle and unskilful the
labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more time would
be required in its production. The labour, however, that forms the
substance of value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform
labour-power. The total labour-power of society, which is embodied in the
sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that society, counts
here as one homogeneous mass of human labour-power, composed though it be
of innumerable individual units. Each of these units is the same as any
other, so far as it has the character of the average labour-power of
society, and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for
producing a commodity, no more time than is needed on an average, no more
than is socially necessary. The labour-time socially necessary is that
required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production,
and with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time.
The introduction of power-looms into England probably reduced by one-half
the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. The
hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time
as before; but for all that, the product of one hour of their labour
represented after the change only half an hour's social labour, and
consequently fell to one-half its former value.

We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any
article is the amount of labour socially necessary, or the labour-time
socially necessary for its production. [9] Each individual commodity, in
this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its class. [10]
Commodities, therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied,
or which can be produced in the same time, have the same value. The value
of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the labour-time necessary
for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of
the other. "As values, all commodities are only definite masses of
congealed labour-time." [11]

The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the
labour-time required for its production also remained constant. But the
latter changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour. This
productiveness is determined by various circumstances, amongst others, by
the average amount of skill of the workmen, the state of science, and the
degree of its practical application, the social organisation of production,
the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by physical
conditions. For example, the same amount of labour in favourable seasons is
embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfavourable, only in four. The same
labour extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines. Diamonds
are of very rare occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their
discovery costs, on an average, a great deal of labour-time. Consequently
much labour is represented in a small compass. Jacob doubts whether gold
has ever been paid for at its full value. This applies still more to
diamonds. According to Eschwege, the total produce of the Brazilian diamond
mines for the eighty years, ending in 1823, had not realised the price of
one and-a-half years' average produce of the sugar and coffee plantations
of the same country, although the diamonds cost much more labour, and
therefore represented more value. With richer mines, the same quantity of
labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall. If
we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon
into diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. In general, the
greater the productiveness of labour, the less is the labour-time required
for the production of an article, the less is the amount of labour
crystallised in that article, and the less is its value; and vice versâ,
the less the productiveness of labour, the greater is the labour-time
required for the production of an article, and the greater is its value.
The value of a commodity, therefore, varies directly as the quantity, and
inversely as the productiveness, of the labour incorporated in it.

A thing can be a use-value, without having value. This is the case whenever
its utility to man is not due to labour. Such are air, virgin soil, natural
meadows, &c. A thing can be useful, and the product of human labour,
without being a commodity. Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the
produce of his own labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not
commodities. In order to produce the latter, he must not only produce
use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values. (And not only for
others, without more. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn for his
feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson. But neither the quit-rent-corn
nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason of the fact that they had
been produced for others. To become a commodity a product must be
transferred to another, whom it will serve as a use-value, by means of an
exchange.) [12] Lastly nothing can have value, without being an object of
utility. If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the
labour does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value.



SECTION 2

THE TWO-FOLD CHARACTER OF
THE LABOUR EMBODIED IN COMMODITIES


At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two
things-use-value and exchange-value. Later on, we saw also that labour,
too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so far as it finds expression
in value, it does not possess the same characteristics that belong to it as
a creator of use-values. I was the first to point out and to examine
critically this two-fold nature of the labour contained in commodities. As
this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political Economy
turns, we must go more into detail.

Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and let
the former be double the value of the latter, so that, if 10 yards of linen
= W, the coat = 2W.

The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Its existence is
the result of a special sort of productive activity, the nature of which is
determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and result. The
labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in use of its
product, or which manifests itself by making its product a use-value, we
call useful labour In this connexion we consider only its useful effect.

As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use-values, so
also are the two forms of labour that produce them, tailoring and weaving.
Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not produced
respectively by labour of different quality, they could not stand to each
other in the relation of commodities. Coats are not exchanged for coats,
one use-value is not exchanged for another of the same kind.

To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as many
different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the order, genus,
species, and variety to which they belong in the social division of labour.
This division of labour is a necessary condition for the production of
commodities, but it does not follow, conversely, that the production of
commodities is a necessary condition for the division of labour. In the
primitive Indian community there is social division of labour, without
production of commodities. Or, to take an example nearer home, in every
factory the labour is divided according to a system, but this division is
not brought about by the operatives mutually exchanging their individual
products. Only such products can become commodities with regard to each
other, as result from different kinds of labour, each kind being carried on
independently and for the account of private individuals.

To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there is contained
useful labour, i.e., productive activity of a definite kind and exercised
with a definite aim. Use-values cannot confront each other as commodities,
unless the useful labour embodied in them is qualitatively different in
each of them. In a community, the produce of which in general takes the
form of commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity producers, this
qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are carried
on independently of individual producers, each on their own account,
develops into a complex system, a social division of labour.

Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in
either case it operates as a use-value. Nor is the relation between the
coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance that
tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the
social division of labour. Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it,
the human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man
becoming a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other element of
material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, must
invariably owe their existence to a special productive activity, exercised
with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates particular nature-given
materials to particular human wants. So far therefore as labour is a
creator of use-value, is useful labour, it is a necessary condition,
independent of all forms of society, for the existence of the human race;
it is an eternal nature-imposed necessity, without which there can be no
material exchanges between man and Nature, and therefore no life.

The use-values, coat, linen, &c., i.e., the bodies of commodities, are
combinations of two elements — matter and labour. If we take away the
useful labour expended upon them, a material substratum is always left,
which is furnished by Nature without the help of man. The latter can work
only as Nature does, that is by changing the form of matter. [13] Nay more,
in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped by natural
forces. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material
wealth, of use-values produced by labour. As William Petty puts it, labour
is its father and the earth its mother.

Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use-value to the value
of commodities.

By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen. But this
is a mere quantitative difference, which for the present does not concern
us. We bear in mind, however, that if the value of the coat is double that
of 10 yds. of linen, 20 yds. of linen must have the same value as one coat.
So far as they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like
substance, objective expressions of essentially identical labour. But
tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. There
are, however, states of society in which one and the same man does
tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms of labour
are mere modifications of the labour of the same individual, and no special
and fixed functions of different persons, just as the coat which our tailor
makes one day, and the trousers which he makes another day, imply only a
variation in the labour of one and the same individual. Moreover, we see at
a glance that, in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour
is, in accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form
of tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. This change may possibly
not take place without friction, but take place it must.

Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz., the
useful character of the labour, is nothing but the expenditure of human
labour-power. Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively different
productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of human brains,
nerves, and muscles, and in this sense are human labour. They are but two
different modes of expending human labour-power. Of course, this
labour-power, which remains the same under all its modifications, must have
attained a certain pitch of development before it can be expended in a
multiplicity of modes. But the value of a commodity represents human labour
in the abstract, the expenditure of human labour in general. And just as in
society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere man, on the
other hand, a very shabby part, [14] so here with mere human labour. It is
the expenditure of simple labour-power, i.e., of the labour-power which, on
an average, apart from any special development, exists in the organism of
every ordinary individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies in
character in different countries and at different times, but in a
particular society it is given. Skilled labour counts only as simple labour
intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of
skilled being considered equal to a greater quantity of simple labour.
Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. A commodity
may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating
it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite
quantity of the latter labour alone. [15] The different proportions in
which different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their
standard. are established by a social process that goes on behind the backs
of the producers, and, consequently, appear to be fixed by custom. For
simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be
unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no more than save ourselves the
trouble of making the reduction.
