Karl Marx
Capital Volume One

Part I
Commodities and Money

SECTION 1

THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY:
USE-VALUE AND VALUE
(THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE)



The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production
prevails, presents itself as "an immense accumulation of commodities," [1]
its unit being a single commodity. Our investigation must therefore begin
with the analysis of a commodity.

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by
its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another. The nature of
such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from
fancy, makes no difference. [2] Neither are we here concerned to know how
the object satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence,
or indirectly as means of production.

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c., may be looked at from the two
points of view of quality and quantity. It is an assemblage of many
properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. To discover the
various uses of things is the work of history. [3] So also is the
establishment of socially-recognized standards of measure for the
quantities of these useful objects. The diversity of these measures has its
origin partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, partly
in convention.

The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. [4] But this utility is not a
thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it
has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity, such as iron,
corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a
use-value, something useful. This property of a commodity is independent of
the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities. When
treating of use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite
quantities, such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The
use-values of commodities furnish the material for a special study, that of
the commercial knowledge of commodities. [5] Use-values become a reality
only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all
wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth. In the form of
society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material
depositories of exchange-value.

Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative relation,
as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for
those of another sort, [6] a relation constantly changing with time and
place. Hence exchange-value appears to be something accidental and purely
relative, and consequently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that
is inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a
contradiction in terms. [7] Let us consider the matter a little more
closely.

A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y
silk, or z gold, &c. — in short, for other commodities in the most
different proportions. Instead of one exchange-value, the wheat has,
therefore, a great many. But since x blacking, y silk, or z gold &c., each
represents the exchange-value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk,
z gold, &c., must, as exchange-values, be replaceable by each other, or
equal to each other. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given
commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, generally, is
only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in
it, yet distinguishable from it.

Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The proportions in which
they are exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be, can always be
represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to
some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn = x cwt. iron. What does this
equation tell us? It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter
of corn and x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something
common to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in
itself is neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is
exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to this third.

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In order to
calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them
into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by
something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the
product of the base multiplied by the altitude. In the same way the
exchange-values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in terms
of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or
less quantity.

This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any
other natural property of commodities. Such properties claim our attention
only in so far as they affect the utility of those commodities, make them
use-values. But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act
characterised by a total abstraction from use-value. Then one use-value is
just as good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient
quantity. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as
another, if the values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in
things of equal value.... An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of
as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." [8] As
use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as
exchange-values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do
not contain an atom of use-value.

If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of commodities, they
have only one common property left, that of being products of labour. But
even the product of labour itself has undergone a change in our hands. If
we make abstraction from its use-value, we make abstraction at the same
time from the material elements and shapes that make the product a
use-value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any other
useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight.
Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the
joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive
labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products themselves, we put
out of sight both the useful character of the various kinds of labour
embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that labour; there is nothing
left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same
sort of labour, human labour in the abstract.

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists of
the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere congelation of homogeneous
human labour, of labour-power expended without regard to the mode of its
expenditure. All that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power
has been expended in their production, that human labour is embodied in
them. When looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them
all, they are — Values.

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange-value
manifests itself as something totally independent of their use-value. But
if we abstract from their use-value, there remains their Value as defined
above. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the
exchange-value of commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value.
The progress of our investigation will show that exchange-value is the only
form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed.
For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value
independently of this, its form.

A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human
labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it. How, then,
is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the quantity of
the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. The
quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration, and labour-time
in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours.

Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by
the quantity of labour spent on it, the more idle and unskilful the
labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more time would
be required in its production. The labour, however, that forms the
substance of value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform
labour-power. The total labour-power of society, which is embodied in the
sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that society, counts
here as one homogeneous mass of human labour-power, composed though it be
of innumerable individual units. Each of these units is the same as any
other, so far as it has the character of the average labour-power of
society, and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for
producing a commodity, no more time than is needed on an average, no more
than is socially necessary. The labour-time socially necessary is that
required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production,
and with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time.
The introduction of power-looms into England probably reduced by one-half
the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. The
hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time
as before; but for all that, the product of one hour of their labour
represented after the change only half an hour's social labour, and
consequently fell to one-half its former value.

We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any
article is the amount of labour socially necessary, or the labour-time
socially necessary for its production. [9] Each individual commodity, in
this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its class. [10]
Commodities, therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied,
or which can be produced in the same time, have the same value. The value
of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the labour-time necessary
for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of
the other. "As values, all commodities are only definite masses of
congealed labour-time." [11]

The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the
labour-time required for its production also remained constant. But the
latter changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour. This
productiveness is determined by various circumstances, amongst others, by
the average amount of skill of the workmen, the state of science, and the
degree of its practical application, the social organisation of production,
the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by physical
conditions. For example, the same amount of labour in favourable seasons is
embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfavourable, only in four. The same
labour extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines. Diamonds
are of very rare occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their
discovery costs, on an average, a great deal of labour-time. Consequently
much labour is represented in a small compass. Jacob doubts whether gold
has ever been paid for at its full value. This applies still more to
diamonds. According to Eschwege, the total produce of the Brazilian diamond
mines for the eighty years, ending in 1823, had not realised the price of
one and-a-half years' average produce of the sugar and coffee plantations
of the same country, although the diamonds cost much more labour, and
therefore represented more value. With richer mines, the same quantity of
labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall. If
we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon
into diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. In general, the
greater the productiveness of labour, the less is the labour-time required
for the production of an article, the less is the amount of labour
crystallised in that article, and the less is its value; and vice versâ,
the less the productiveness of labour, the greater is the labour-time
required for the production of an article, and the greater is its value.
The value of a commodity, therefore, varies directly as the quantity, and
inversely as the productiveness, of the labour incorporated in it.

A thing can be a use-value, without having value. This is the case whenever
its utility to man is not due to labour. Such are air, virgin soil, natural
meadows, &c. A thing can be useful, and the product of human labour,
without being a commodity. Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the
produce of his own labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not
commodities. In order to produce the latter, he must not only produce
use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values. (And not only for
others, without more. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn for his
feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson. But neither the quit-rent-corn
nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason of the fact that they had
been produced for others. To become a commodity a product must be
transferred to another, whom it will serve as a use-value, by means of an
exchange.) [12] Lastly nothing can have value, without being an object of
utility. If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the
labour does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value.



SECTION 2

THE TWO-FOLD CHARACTER OF
THE LABOUR EMBODIED IN COMMODITIES


At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two
things-use-value and exchange-value. Later on, we saw also that labour,
too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so far as it finds expression
in value, it does not possess the same characteristics that belong to it as
a creator of use-values. I was the first to point out and to examine
critically this two-fold nature of the labour contained in commodities. As
this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political Economy
turns, we must go more into detail.

Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and let
the former be double the value of the latter, so that, if 10 yards of linen
= W, the coat = 2W.

The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Its existence is
the result of a special sort of productive activity, the nature of which is
determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and result. The
labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in use of its
product, or which manifests itself by making its product a use-value, we
call useful labour In this connexion we consider only its useful effect.

As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use-values, so
also are the two forms of labour that produce them, tailoring and weaving.
Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not produced
respectively by labour of different quality, they could not stand to each
other in the relation of commodities. Coats are not exchanged for coats,
one use-value is not exchanged for another of the same kind.

To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as many
different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the order, genus,
species, and variety to which they belong in the social division of labour.
This division of labour is a necessary condition for the production of
commodities, but it does not follow, conversely, that the production of
commodities is a necessary condition for the division of labour. In the
primitive Indian community there is social division of labour, without
production of commodities. Or, to take an example nearer home, in every
factory the labour is divided according to a system, but this division is
not brought about by the operatives mutually exchanging their individual
products. Only such products can become commodities with regard to each
other, as result from different kinds of labour, each kind being carried on
independently and for the account of private individuals.

To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there is contained
useful labour, i.e., productive activity of a definite kind and exercised
with a definite aim. Use-values cannot confront each other as commodities,
unless the useful labour embodied in them is qualitatively different in
each of them. In a community, the produce of which in general takes the
form of commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity producers, this
qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are carried
on independently of individual producers, each on their own account,
develops into a complex system, a social division of labour.

Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in
either case it operates as a use-value. Nor is the relation between the
coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance that
tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the
social division of labour. Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it,
the human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man
becoming a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other element of
material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, must
invariably owe their existence to a special productive activity, exercised
with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates particular nature-given
materials to particular human wants. So far therefore as labour is a
creator of use-value, is useful labour, it is a necessary condition,
independent of all forms of society, for the existence of the human race;
it is an eternal nature-imposed necessity, without which there can be no
material exchanges between man and Nature, and therefore no life.

The use-values, coat, linen, &c., i.e., the bodies of commodities, are
combinations of two elements — matter and labour. If we take away the
useful labour expended upon them, a material substratum is always left,
which is furnished by Nature without the help of man. The latter can work
only as Nature does, that is by changing the form of matter. [13] Nay more,
in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped by natural
forces. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material
wealth, of use-values produced by labour. As William Petty puts it, labour
is its father and the earth its mother.

Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use-value to the value
of commodities.

By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen. But this
is a mere quantitative difference, which for the present does not concern
us. We bear in mind, however, that if the value of the coat is double that
of 10 yds. of linen, 20 yds. of linen must have the same value as one coat.
So far as they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like
substance, objective expressions of essentially identical labour. But
tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. There
are, however, states of society in which one and the same man does
tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms of labour
are mere modifications of the labour of the same individual, and no special
and fixed functions of different persons, just as the coat which our tailor
makes one day, and the trousers which he makes another day, imply only a
variation in the labour of one and the same individual. Moreover, we see at
a glance that, in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour
is, in accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form
of tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. This change may possibly
not take place without friction, but take place it must.

Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz., the
useful character of the labour, is nothing but the expenditure of human
labour-power. Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively different
productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of human brains,
nerves, and muscles, and in this sense are human labour. They are but two
different modes of expending human labour-power. Of course, this
labour-power, which remains the same under all its modifications, must have
attained a certain pitch of development before it can be expended in a
multiplicity of modes. But the value of a commodity represents human labour
in the abstract, the expenditure of human labour in general. And just as in
society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere man, on the
other hand, a very shabby part, [14] so here with mere human labour. It is
the expenditure of simple labour-power, i.e., of the labour-power which, on
an average, apart from any special development, exists in the organism of
every ordinary individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies in
character in different countries and at different times, but in a
particular society it is given. Skilled labour counts only as simple labour
intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of
skilled being considered equal to a greater quantity of simple labour.
Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. A commodity
may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating
it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite
quantity of the latter labour alone. [15] The different proportions in
which different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their
standard. are established by a social process that goes on behind the backs
of the producers, and, consequently, appear to be fixed by custom. For
simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be
unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no more than save ourselves the
trouble of making the reduction.

Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, we abstract
from their different use-values, so it is with the labour represented by
those values: we disregard the difference between its useful forms, weaving
and tailoring. As the use-values, coat and linen, are combinations of
special productive activities with cloth and yarn, while the values, coat
and linen, are, on the other hand, mere homogeneous congelations of
undifferentiated labour, so the labour embodied in these latter values does
not count by virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only
as being expenditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weaving are
necessary factors in the creation of the use-values, coat and linen,
precisely because these two kinds of labour are of different qualities; but
only in so far as abstraction is made from their special qualities, only in
so far as both possess the same quality of being human labour, do tailoring
and weaving form the substance of the values of the same articles.

Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values of definite
magnitude, and according to our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much
as the ten yards of linen. Whence this difference in their values? It is
owing to the fact that the linen contains only half as much labour as the
coat, and consequently, that in the production of the latter, labour-power
must have been expended during twice the time necessary for the production
of the former.

While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour contained in a
commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference to value it counts only
quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human labour pure and simple.
In the former case, it is a question of How and What, in the latter of How
much? How long a time? Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity
represents only the quantity of labour embodied in it, it follows that all
commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal in value.

If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour
required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, the sum of the
values of the coats produced increases with their number. If one coat
represents x days' labour, two coats represent 2x days' labour, and so on.
But assume that the duration of the labour necessary for he production of a
coat becomes doubled or halved. In the first case one coat is worth as much
as two coats were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as
much as one was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same
service as before. and the useful labour embodied in it remains of the same
quality. But the quantity of labour spent on its production has altered.

An increase in the quantity of use-values is an increase of material
wealth. With two coats two men can be clothed, with one coat only one man.
Nevertheless, an increased quantity of material wealth may correspond to a
simultaneous fall in the magnitude of its value. This antagonistic movement
has its origin in the two-fold character of labour. Productive power has
reference, of course, only to labour of some useful concrete form, the
efficacy of any special productive activity during a given time being
dependent on its productiveness. Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more
or less abundant source of products, in proportion to the rise or fall of
its productiveness. On the other hand, no change in this productiveness
affects the labour represented by value. Since productive power is an
attribute of the concrete useful forms of labour, of course it can no
longer have any bearing on that labour, so soon as we make abstraction from
those concrete useful forms. However then productive power may vary, the
same labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal
amounts of value. But it will yield, during equal periods of time,
different quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power rise,
fewer, if it fall. The same change in productive power, which increases the
fruitfulness of labour, and, in consequence, the quantity of use-values
produced by that labour, will diminish the total value of this increased
quantity of use-values, provided such change shorten the total labour-time
necessary for their production; and vice versâ.

On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an expenditure of
human labour-power, and in its character of identical abstract human
labour, it creates and forms the value of commodities. On the other hand,
all labour is the expenditure of human labour-power in a special form and
with a definite aim, and in this, its character of concrete useful labour,
it produces use-values. [16]




SECTION 3

THE FORM OF VALUE OR EXCHANGE-VALUE


Commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, articles, or
goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c. This is their plain, homely, bodily
form. They are, however, commodities, only because they are something
two-fold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time, depositories of
value. They manifest themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form
of commodities, only in so far as they have two forms, a physical or
natural form, and a value-form.

The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect from Dame
Quickly, that we don't know "where to have it." The value of commodities is
the very opposite of the coarse materiality of their substance, not an atom
of matter enters into its composition. Turn and examine a single commodity,
by itself, as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it
seems impossible to grasp it. If, however we bear in mind that the value of
commodities has a purely social reality, and that they acquire this reality
only in so far as they are expressions or embodiments of one identical
social substance, viz., human labour, it follows as a matter of course,
that value can only manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to
commodity. In fact we started from exchange-value, or the exchange relation
of commodities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it. We
must now return to this form under which value first appeared to us.

Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a
value-form common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with the
varied bodily forms of their use-values. I mean their money-form. Here,
however, a task is set us, the performance of which has never yet even been
attempted by bourgeois economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this
money-form, of developing the expression of value implied in the
value-relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible
outline, to the dazzling money-form. By doing this we shall, at the same
time, solve the riddle presented by money.

The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commodity to some one
other commodity of a different kind. Hence the relation between the values
of two commodities supplies us with the simplest expression of the value of
a single commodity.

A. Elementary or Accidental Form Of Value

x commodity A = y commodity B, or
x commodity A is worth y commodity B.

20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or
20 Yards of linen are worth 1 coat.

1. The two poles of the expression of value. Relative form and Equivalent
form

The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elementary form.
Its analysis, therefore, is our real difficulty.

Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and the
coat), evidently play two different parts. The linen expresses its value in
the coat; the coat serves as the material in which that value is expressed.
The former plays an active, the latter a passive, part. The value of the
linen is represented as relative value, or appears in relative form. The
coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in equivalent form.

The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately connected,
mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the expression of value;
but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, antagonistic extremes —
i.e., poles of the same expression. They are allotted respectively to the
two different commodities brought into relation by that expression. It is
not possible to express the value of linen in linen. 20 yards of linen = 20
yards of linen is no expression of value. On the contrary, such an equation
merely says that 20 yards of linen are nothing else than 20 yards of linen,
a definite quantity of the use-value linen. The value of the linen can
therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some other commodity. The
relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, therefore, the
presence of some other commodity — here the coat — under the form of an
equivalent. On the other hand, the commodity that figures as the equivalent
cannot at the same time assume the relative form. That second commodity is
not the one whose value is expressed. Its function is merely to serve as
the material in which the value of the first commodity is expressed.

No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen
are worth 1 coat, implies the opposite relation. 1 coat = 20 yards of
linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. But, in that case, I must
reverse the equation, in order to express the value of the coat relatively;
and. so soon as I do that the linen becomes the equivalent instead of the
coat. A single commodity cannot, therefore, simultaneously assume, in the
same expression of value, both forms. The very polarity of these forms
makes them mutually exclusive.

Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or the opposite
equivalent form, depends entirely upon its accidental position in the
expression of value — that is, upon whether it is the commodity whose value
is being expressed or the commodity in which value is being expressed.

2. The Relative Form of value

(a.) The nature and import of this form

In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value of a
commodity lies hidden in the value-relation of two commodities, we must, in
the first place, consider the latter entirely apart from its quantitative
aspect. The usual mode of procedure is generally the reverse, and in the
value-relation nothing is seen but the proportion between definite
quantities of two different sorts of commodities that are considered equal
to each other. It is apt to be forgotten that the magnitudes of different
things can be compared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are
expressed in terms of the same unit. It is only as expressions of such a
unit that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensurable.
[17]

Whether 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 20 coats or = x coats-that is,
whether a given quantity of linen is worth few or many coats, every such
statement implies that the linen and coats, as magnitudes of value, are
expressions of the same unit, things of the same kind. Linen = coat is the
basis of the equation.

But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus assumed, do not
play the same part. It is only the value of the linen that is expressed.
And how? By its reference to the coat as its equivalent, as something that
can be exchanged for it. In this relation the coat is the mode of existence
of value, is value embodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen.
On the other hand, the linen's own value comes to the front, receives
independent expression, for it is only as being value that it is comparable
with the coat as a thing of equal value, or exchangeable with the coat. To
borrow an illustration from chemistry, butyric acid is a different
substance from propyl formate. Yet both are made up of the same chemical
substances, carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O), and that, too, in
like proportions — namely, C4H8O2. If now we equate butyric acid to propyl
formate, then, in the first place, propyl formate would be, in this
relation, merely a form of existence of C4H8O2; and in the second place, we
should be stating that butyric acid also consists of C4H8O2. Therefore, by
thus equating the two substances, expression would be given to their
chemical composition, while their different physical forms would be
neglected.

If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations of human
labour, we reduce them by our analysis, it is true, to the abstraction,
value; but we ascribe to this value no form apart from their bodily form.
It is otherwise in the value-relation of one commodity to another. Here,
the one stands forth in its character of value by reason of its relation to
the other.

By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate the labour
embodied in the former to that in the latter. Now, it is true that the
tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete labour of a different sort
from the weaving which makes the linen. But the act of equating it to the
weaving, reduces the tailoring to that which is really equal in the two
kinds of labour, to their common character of human labour. In this
roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far
as it weaves value, has nothing to distinguish it from tailoring, and,
consequently, is abstract human labour. It is the expression of equivalence
between different sorts of commodities that alone brings into relief the
specific character of value-creating labour, and this it does by actually
reducing the different varieties of labour embodied in the different kinds
of commodities to their common quality of human labour in the abstract.
[18]

There is, however, something else required beyond the expression of the
specific character of the labour of which the value of the linen consists.
Human labour-power in motion, or human labour, creates value, but is not
itself value. It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied
in the form of some object. In order to express the value of the linen as a
congelation of human labour, that value must be expressed as having
objective existence, as being a something materially different from the
linen itself, and yet a something common to the linen and all other
commodities. The problem is already solved.

When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation of value, the
coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, as something of the
same kind, because it is value. In this position it is a thing in which we
see nothing but value, or whose palpable bodily form represents value. Yet
the coat itself, the body of the commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. A
coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does the first piece of
linen we take hold of. This shows that when placed in value-relation to the
linen, the coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many
a man strutting about in a gorgeous uniform counts for more than when in
mufti.

In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the shape of
tailoring, must have been actually expended. Human labour is therefore
accumulated in it. In this aspect the coat is a depository of value, but
though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through. And as
equivalent of the linen in the value equation, it exists under this aspect
alone, counts therefore as embodied value, as a body that is value. A, for
instance, cannot be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same time majesty in
B's eyes assumes the bodily form of A, and, what is more, with every new
father of the people, changes its features, hair, and many other things
besides.

Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equivalent of the
linen, the coat officiates as the form of value. The value of the commodity
linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat, the value of
one by the use-value of the other. As a use-value, the linen is something
palpably different from the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and
now has the appearance of a coat. Thus the linen acquires a value-form
different from its physical form. The fact that it is value, is made
manifest by its equality with the coat, just as the sheep's nature of a
Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb of God.

We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commodities has already
told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon as it comes into
communication with another commodity, the coat. Only it betrays its
thoughts in that language with which alone it is familiar, the language of
commodities. In order to tell us that its own value is created by labour in
its abstract character of human labour, it says that the coat, in so far as
it is worth as much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the
same labour as the linen. In order to inform us that its sublime reality as
value is not the same as its buckram body, it says that value has the
appearance of a coat, and consequently that so far as the linen is value,
it and the coat are as like as two peas. We may here remark, that the
language of commodities has, besides Hebrew, many other more or less
correct dialects. The German "Wertsein," to be worth, for instance,
expresses in a less striking manner than the Romance verbs "valere,"
"valer," "valoir," that the equating of commodity B to commodity A, is
commodity A's own mode of expressing its value. Paris vaut bien une messe.

By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our equation, the
bodily form of commodity B becomes the value-form of commodity A, or the
body of commodity B acts as a mirror to the value of commodity A. [19] By
putting itself in relation with commodity B, as value in propria personâ,
as the matter of which human labour is made up, the commodity A converts
the value in use, B, into the substance in which to express its, A's, own
value. The value of A, thus expressed in the use-value of B, has taken the
form of relative value.

(b.) Quantitative determination of Relative value

Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a useful object
of given quantity, as 15 bushels of corn, or 100 Ibs. of coffee. And a
given quantity of any commodity contains a definite quantity of human
labour. The value-form must therefore not only express value generally, but
also value in definite quantity. Therefore, in the value-relation of
commodity A to commodity B, of the linen to the coat, not only is the
latter, as value in general, made the equal in quality of the linen, but a
definite quantity of coat (1 coat) is made the equivalent of a definite
quantity (20 yards) of linen.

The equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth
one coat, implies that the same quantity of value-substance (congealed
labour) is embodied in both; that the two commodities have each cost the
same amount of labour of the same quantity of labour-time. But the
labour-time necessary for the production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat
varies with every change in the productiveness of weaving or tailoring. We
have now to consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative
aspect of the relative expression of value.

I. Let the value of the linen vary, [20] that of the coat remaining
constant. If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing soil,
the labour-time necessary for the production of the linen be doubled, the
value of the linen will also be doubled. Instead of the equation, 20 yards
of linen = 1 coat, we should have 20 yards of linen = 2 coats, since 1 coat
would now contain only half the labour-time embodied in 20 yards of linen.
If, on the other hand, in consequence, say, of improved looms, this
labour-time be reduced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by
one-half. Consequently, we should have 20 yards of linen = 1/2 coat. The
relative value of commodity A, i.e., its value expressed in commodity B,
rises and falls directly as the value of A, the value of B being supposed
constant.

II. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value of the coat
varies. If, under these circumstances, in consequence, for instance, of a
poor crop of wool, the labour-time necessary for the production of a coat
becomes doubled, we have instead of 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, 20 yards of
linen = 1/2 coat. If, on the other hand, the value of the coat sinks by
one-half, then 20 yards of linen = 2 coats. Hence, if the value of
commodity A remain constant, its relative value expressed in commodity B
rises and falls inversely as the value of B.

If we compare the different cases in I. and II., we see that the same
change of magnitude in relative value may arise from totally opposite
causes. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, becomes 20 yards of
linen = 2 coats, either, because the value of the linen has doubled, or
because the value of the coat has fallen by one-half; and it becomes 20
yards of linen = 1/2 coat, either, because the value of the linen has
fallen by one-half, or because the value of the coat has doubled.

III. Let the quantities of labour-time respectively necessary for the
production of the linen and the coat vary simultaneously in the same
direction and in the same proportion. In this case 20 yards of linen
continue equal to 1 coat, however much their values may have altered. Their
change of value is seen as soon as they are compared with a third
commodity, whose value has remained constant. If the values of all
commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their
relative values would remain unaltered. Their real change of value would
appear from the diminished or increased quantity of commodities produced in
a given time.

IV. The labour-time respectively necessary for the production of the linen
and the coat, and therefore the value of these commodities may
simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at unequal rates or in
opposite directions, or in other ways. The effect of all these possible
different variations, on the relative value of a commodity, may be deduced
from the results of I., II., and III.

Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither unequivocally nor
exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, that is, in the
equation expressing the magnitude of relative value. The relative value of
a commodity may vary, although its value remains constant. Its relative
value may remain constant, although its value varies; and finally,
simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that of its
relative expression by no means necessarily correspond in amount. [21]

3. The Equivalent form of value

We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing its value in the
use-value of a commodity differing in kind (the coat), at the same time
impresses upon the latter a specific form of value, namely that of the
equivalent. The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a value by
the fact that the coat, without having assumed a value-form different from
its bodily form, is equated to the linen. The fact that the latter
therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly
exchangeable with it. Therefore, when we say that a commodity is in the
equivalent form, we express the fact that it is directly exchangeable with
other commodities.

When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent of another,
such as linen, and coats consequently acquire the characteristic property
of being directly exchangeable with linen, we are far from knowing in what
proportion the two are exchangeable. The value of the linen being given in
magnitude, that proportion depends on the value of the coat. Whether the
coat serves as the equivalent and the linen as relative value, or the linen
as the equivalent and the coat as relative value, the magnitude of the
coat's value is determined, independently of its value-form, by the
labour-time necessary for its production. But whenever the coat assumes in
the equation of value, the position of equivalent, its value acquires no
quantitative expression; on the contrary, the commodity coat now figures
only as a definite quantity of some article.

For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? 2 coats. Because the
commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, because the use-value
coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an embodiment of value, therefore
a definite number of coats suffices to express the definite quantity of
value in the linen. Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value
of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express the quantity of their own
value. A superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation
of value, the equivalent figures exclusively as a simple quantity of some
article, of some use-value, has misled Bailey, as also many others, both
before and after him, into seeing, in the expression of value, merely a
quantitative relation. The truth being, that when a commodity acts as
equivalent, no quantitative determination of its value is expressed.

The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the
equivalent, is this: use-value becomes the form of manifestation, the
phenomenal form of its opposite, value.
